h2. Indexing on Neo4j::Node

You will lead ...

endprologue.

Example:

<pre><code class="ruby">
  Neo4j::Node.index :name
  ...
  Neo4j::Transaction.run do

    Neo4j::Node.new :name => 'andreas'

  end  # the indexing now takes place

  # we can now query using the lucene query syntax
  Neo4j::Node.find('name: andreas')

</code></pre>    

h3. Indexing on Neo4j::NodeMixin

Indexes can also be declared on your models.

Example:

<pre><code class="ruby">
  class Person
    include Neo4j::NodeMixin
    
    index :name
  end
</code></pre>    

After each transaction finishes the Person will be indexed.
<pre><code class="ruby">
  andreas = Person.new :name => 'andreas'
</code></pre>    


The full lucene query syntax is available:
<pre><code class="ruby">
  Person.find('name: andreas').first #=> andreas
</code></pre>    

h3. Indexing on Neo4j::Relationship

Works as indexing on Neo4j::Node

h3. Indexing on Neo4j::RelationshipMixin

Works as indexing on Neo4j::NodeMixin

h3. Fulltext

By default indexes are of type :exact.
To use a fulltext index provide the :type => :fulltext parameter for both the index and find method !

Example:

<pre><code class="ruby">
  class Person
    include Neo4j::NodeMixin
    
    index :name, :type => :fulltext
  end
</code></pre>    

<pre><code class="ruby">
  Person.find('name: andreas', :type => :fulltext).first #=> andreas
</code></pre>    

h3. Indexing Related Nodes (Shared Index)

Two or more classes can share the same index. For example, let say we have two classes Person and Phone and
each person can have several phone number nodes.

Example:
<pre><code class="ruby">
  class Person
     include Neo4j::NodeMixin
     has_n :phones
     index :name
  end
</code></pre>    

<pre><code class="ruby">
  class Phone
     include Neo4j::NodeMixin
     index :number
  end   
</code></pre>    

With the example above we can only query and find Phone nodes. If we want to query both the Person and Phone nodes we should use the ''via''
key word.

Example
<pre><code class="ruby">
   class Phone  # forward declaration, needed below
      include Neo4j::NodeMixin
   end
</code></pre>    

<pre><code class="ruby">
   class Person
      include Neo4j::NodeMixin
      has_n(:phones).to(Phone)
      index :name
   end
</code></pre>    

<pre><code class="ruby">
   class Phone
      has_n(:people).from(Person, :phones)  # several people can have the same phone number
      index :number, :via => :people
   end   
</code></pre>    

We can now do a query on the Person class instead.

Example
<pre><code class="ruby">
  Person.find('name: *smith AND phone: "040*")
</code></pre>    

h4. Gotchas

# You can only index incoming relationship
# You must declare both direction with to and from in a has_n or has_one.

h3. Reuse an Indexer (Shared Index)

You can specify that a class should use the same lucene indexx as another class.

Example
<pre><code class="ruby">
  class Employee
    property :employee_id
    node_indexer Person
    index :employee_id
  end
</code></pre>    

The Employee and Person class now shares the same index. That means that you can search on indexes declared
in both the Person and Employee classes.

h3. Query Syntax

Neo4j/Lucene support a wide range of queries
* Wildcard searches
* Fuzzy searches
* Proximity searches
* Range searches

For information of the syntax see [[here|http://lucene.apache.org/java/3_0_2/queryparsersyntax.html]]

h3. Sort Order

It is only possible to sort on :exact indexes. Sorting on :fulltext index is not possible.
Sort order is specified with the *asc* and *desc* method.

Example:
<pre><code class="ruby">
Person.find('email: *@gmail.com').asc(:email, :age) # sort by ascending order email&age
Person.find('email: *@gmail.com').asc(:name, :age).desc(:email)
</code></pre>    

By default fields are sorted as Strings. If you want to sort as integer (Fixnum) you have to declare the type first, see below.

h2. Performance and Configurations

h3. Lucene Configuration 

It is possible to create your own lucene configuration.
Example, see the configuration for fulltext and exact indexing in the Neo4j::Config[:lucene]
You can add your own lucene indexing configuration in the Neo4j::Config and use it with the index keyword.

<pre><code class="ruby">

  Neo4j::Config[:lucene][:my_index_type] = ...
  
  class Person
     index :name, :type => :my_index_type
  end
</code></pre>    


h3. Indexing and Query Before Commit

When you declare an index it will make sure that the neo4j property and the lucene index will be synchronized.
This happens when the transaction commits.
If you want to index properties before the transaction commits you can do it yourself.

Example (from RSpec):

<pre><code class="ruby">
    new_node = Neo4j::Node.new
    new_node[:name] = 'Kalle Kula'
    new_node.add_index(:name)
    new_node.rm_index(:name)
    new_node[:name] = 'lala'
    new_node.add_index(:name)
    Neo4j::Node.find('name: lala').first.should == new_node
    Neo4j::Node.find('name: "Kalle Kula"').first.should_not == new_node
</code></pre>    

h3. Optimization

If you are looping thru a lot of nodes you might get better performance by not loading the Ruby wrappers
around the Java nodes.

<pre><code class="ruby">
  Person.find('name: andreas', :type => :fulltext, :wrapped => false)
</code></pre>    

When using the @:wrapped => false@ parameter the find method will return a Java @org.neo4j.graphdb.index.IndexHit@ instance
(which works like an Ruby Enumerable so you can use the normal each, collect etc.. methods)

h2. Unimplemented features

h3. Numerical Fields

In order to support sort order and range queries on Fixnum, Float and Date queries you need
to specify that the field will be indexed as a numerical field.

Example:

<pre><code class="ruby">
class Person
  include Neo4j::NodeMixin
  property :age, :type => Fixnum
  index :age, :type => :exact
</code></pre>    

h3. Range Queries

*Not sure if or when this will be implemented*
<pre><code class="ruby">
  Person.find(:age => 20..30)
  Person.find(:height).between(1.52, 1.87)
</code></pre>    

h3. Boolean Queries

*Not sure if or when this will be implemented*
<pre><code class="ruby">
  query1 = Person.find(:salary => 2000..3000).or(:name => 'kalle')
  query2 = Person.find(:age => 30)
  query1.and(query2).each {|node| puts "name #{node[:name]}"}
</code></pre>    

h3. Date Queries

*Not sure if or when this will be implemented*
<pre><code class="ruby">
  class Person
    property :born, :type => Date
    index :born
  end
  Person.find("born:[20080427 TO 20100203]")
  Person.find(:born).between(Date.today, 5.years.ago)
</code></pre>    
    
    
